+++
title = "Open Source is a Gift, Relicensing is a Grift"
description = ""
date = 2023-08-11

[taxonomies]
tags = ["open source"]
+++

Open Source is a Gift. But a gift that comes with strings attached is a shitty
one.

<!-- more -->

HashiCorp [recently announced its decision to relicense their
software](https://web.archive.org/web/20230811143814/https://www.hashicorp.com/blog/hashicorp-adopts-business-source-license).
I've never used, nor contributed to their software so I don't particularly care,
but since there's a lot of takes flying around in _the discourse_ I wanted to
express my own thoughts on the general pattern of companies trying to relicense
and lock down the past permissiveness of the software they have created.

Different folks will ascribe different definitions (or even "requirements") to
whether something actually is Open Source or not. To me, Open Source is software
given away to others to do with it as they will. In other words, [a
Gift](https://web.archive.org/web/20230811144941/https://apenwarr.ca/log/20211229).

_Open Source as a Gift_ is what happens when someone truly gives away software
they've created because they want to share the value it brings with no strings
attached. Someone who makes a contribution to that work (technical or otherwise) is
also giving a Gift in return under the same terms.

What frustrates and annoys me is when people try to defend **Open Source as a
Grift** as if it's the same thing. **Open Source as a Grift** is what happens
when a corporation adopts Open Source as a business _strategy_. They start out
giving software away under a permissive license to garner adoption and extract
free-as-in-labor contributions from others. Sooner or later the corporation
decides it wants to extract rent from its products (or it decides it isn't able
to extract _enough_ rent) and tries to claw back control over their software and
make it so that _only they_ can (monetarily) profit directly from that work.

I have no sympathy for situations like [Elastic bemoaning
AWS](https://web.archive.org/web/20230811152832/https://www.zdnet.com/article/elastic-changes-open-source-license-to-monetize-cloud-service-use/)
"unfairly" profiting by hosting their software. AWS's business model is to rent
servers and software to customers. Elastic's business model is (was?) developing
software and giving it away under terms that permits others to build on top of
it. Their sudden regret in not being able to extract the same rent with their
existing business model does not change the fact that _they chose to build
permissive, free-as-in-beer software knowing that someone like AWS could, and
would, come along and make money with it_.

Now, don't get me wrong: I think everyone should be fairly compensated for their
labor, we all have to put food on the table in this world of capitalism. But _if
you cannot economically sustain yourself by giving Gifts away_ **then you have
no business in doing so**. And you most certainly do not get to come back after
the fact, [break the social
contract](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-zRN7XLCRhc&t=2483s), and demand
everyone adopt new terms on how they use the very thing you voluntarily chose to
give away.

Of course the tension here is that if those who engage in **Open Source as a
Grift** kept their software proprietary from the start, it would not have seen
the same level of adoption or been able to extract contributions from others.

You can't have it both ways.

Attempting to relicense to less permissive terms is, and always has been,
[enshittification](https://web.archive.org/web/20230811151446/https://pluralistic.net/2023/01/21/potemkin-ai/).
